1 Arctic greening is attributed to which of the following reasons? 
A. More regular commercial ship sailing 
B. Global Warming 
C. Ozone Hole formation 
D. Erratic ocean current flow 
Correct Answer : B 
Answer Justification : 
Justification and Learning: Arctic greening is a term related with the CO2 fertilization effect. 
The carbon fertilization effect suggests that the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 
increases the rate of photosynthesis in plants. The effect varies depending on the plant species, the 
temperature, and the availability of water and nutrients. 
From a quarter to half of Earths vegetated lands has shown significant greening over the last 35 
years largely due to rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
Scientists have been finding, that as northern portions of the planet (Arctic) warm up even as total 
atmospheric carbon dioxide increases, theres been an increase in plant growth in these regions. 
Studies led by Trevor Keenan from the Department of Energys Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory (Berkeley Lab) show that, from 2002 to 2014, plants appear to have gone into overdrive, 
starting to pull more carbon dioxide out of the air than they have done before. 
The result was that the rate at which carbon dioxide accumulates in the atmosphere did not 
increase during this time period, although previously, it had grown considerably in concert with 
growing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
2 Consider the following statements. 
1. Pitts Act of 1784 was the first step taken by the British Government to control and regulate the 
affairs of the East India Company in India. 
2. In 1858, in the wake of the sepoy mutiny, the British Crown assumed direct responsibility for the 
governance of India. 
3. Various features of the Indian Constitution and polity have their roots in the British rule. 
4. A Supreme Court at Calcutta was setup following the Charter Act of 1833. 
Select the correct answer using the codes below. 
A. 1, 2 and 3 only 
B. 2 and 3 only 
C. 2, 3 and 4 only 
D. 1 and 4 only 
Correct Answer : B 
Answer Justification : 
Justification: Statement 1: It was the regulating Act of 1773. 
In 1765, the Company, which till now had purely trading functions obtained the diwani (i.e., rights 
over revenue and civil justice) of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 
The regulating Act of 1773 is of great constitutional importance as (a) it was the first step taken by 
the British Government to control and regulate the affairs of the East India Company in India; (b) it 
recognised, for the first time, the political and administrative functions of the Company; and (c) it 
laid the foundations of central administration in India. 
Statement 2: This was due to the GoI Act of 1858, the details of which are well covered in 
Laxmikanth and need not be repeated here. 
The act known as the Act for the Good Government of India, abolished the East India Company, and 
transferred the powers of government, territories and revenues to the British Crown. 
Statement 3: Federal Service Commission, division of powers, Parliamentary form of government 
etc. have all their roots in the acts enacted prior to 1947. We will cover this in greater depth as we 
proceed with the syllabus. 
Statement 4: This was the regulating Act of 1773. It provided for the establishment of a Supreme 
Court at Calcutta (1774) comprising one chief justice and three other judges. 
Q Source: Chapter 1: Indian Polity: M Laxmikanth 
Rahul Asthana - asthana.rahul1@gmail.com - 8050005857
 
Mock Test 1 Total Marks : 200 
offline.insightsias.com 3 
Insights Active Learning | All rights reserved - 81272. You may not reproduce, distribute or exploit the contents in any form without 
written permission by copyright owner. Copyright infringers may face civil and criminal liability 
3 How the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) will be useful for China? 
1. CPEC project will allow Chinese energy imports to circumvent the Straits of Malacca and South 
China Sea routes thus avoiding potential confrontation with the USA. 
2. CPEC will provide China an alternative and shorter route for energy imports from the Middle East, 
thereby reducing shipping costs and transit times. 
Which of the above is/are correct? 
A. 1 only 
B. 2 only 
C. Both 1 and 2 
D. None 
Correct Answer : C 
Answer Justification : 
Justification: Statement 1: The Straits of Malacca provide China with its shortest maritime access 
to Europe, Africa, and the Middle East. 
Approximately 80% of its Middle Eastern energy imports also pass through the Straits of 
Malacca. As the worlds biggest oil importer, energy security is a key concern for China while 
current sea routes used to import Middle Eastern oil are frequently patrolled by the United 
States Navy. 
In the event that China were to face hostile actions from a state or non-state actor, energy 
imports through the Straits of Malacca could be halted, which in turn would paralyse the 
Chinese economy in a scenario that is frequently referred to as the Malacca Dilemma. 
In addition to vulnerabilities faced in the Straits of Malacca region, China is heavily 
dependent upon sea-routes that pass through the South China Sea, near the disputed Spratly 
Islands and Paracel Islands, which are currently a source of tension between China, Taiwan, 
Vietnam, the Philippines, and the United States. 
The CPEC project will allow Chinese energy imports to circumvent these contentious areas 
and find a new artery in the west, and thereby decrease the possibility of confrontation 
between the United States and China. 
Statement 2: In addition to its significance to reduce Chinese dependence on the Sea of Malacca 
and South China Sea routes, CPEC will provide China an alternative and shorter route for energy 
imports from the Middle East, thereby reducing shipping costs and transit times. 
The currently available sea-route to China is roughly 12,000 kilometres long, while the distance 
from Gwadar Port to Xinjiang province is approximately 3,000 kilometres, with another 3,500 
kilometres from Xinjiang to Chinas eastern coast. 
Learning: CPEC is a collection of infrastructure projects that are currently under construction 
throughout Pakistan. 
Rahul Asthana - asthana.rahul1@gmail.com - 8050005857
 
Mock Test 1 Total Marks : 200 
offline.insightsias.com 4 
Insights Active Learning | All rights reserved - 81272. You may not reproduce, distribute or exploit the contents in any form without 
written permission by copyright owner. Copyright infringers may face civil and criminal liability 
The CPEC is a landmark project in the annals of history of Pakistan. It is the largest investment 
Pakistan has attracted since independence and largest by China in any foreign country. 
The CPEC Alignments will improve connectivity to restive Xinjiang, thereby increasing the regions 
potential to attract public and private investment. 
CPEC is considered central to China–Pakistan relations; its central importance is reflected by 
Chinas inclusion of the project as part of its 13th five-year development plan. 
The CPEC projects will also complement Chinas Western Development plan, which includes not 
only Xinjiang, but also the neighbouring regions of Tibet and Qinghai. 
DISCLAIMER: The international borders depicted in the image above are by no means 
authoritative and only serve illustrative and pedagogic purposes. 
Q Source: Additional Research: 
http://www.insightsonindia.com/2018/06/27/insights-daily-current-affairs-27-june-2018/ 
Rahul Asthana - asthana.rahul1@gmail.com - 8050005857
 
Mock Test 1 Total Marks : 200 
offline.insightsias.com 5 
Insights Active Learning | All rights reserved - 81272. You may not reproduce, distribute or exploit the contents in any form without 
written permission by copyright owner. Copyright infringers may face civil and criminal liability 
4 With reference to Zoonosis, consider the following statements. 
1. A zoonosis is any disease or infection that is naturally transmissible from vertebrate animals to 
humans. 
2. Zoonosis can be caused only by either virus or protozoa. 
3. Zoonotic diseases create obstacles to international trade in animal products. 
Select the correct answer using the codes below. 
A. 1 and 2 only 
B. 2 and 3 only 
C. 1 and 3 only 
D. 1, 2 and 3 
Correct Answer : C 
Answer Justification : 
Justification: Statement 2: Look at the word only in S2. Statements containing only, must, 
always and other such extreme words are usually wrong. 
A zoonosis is any disease or infection that is naturally transmissible from vertebrate animals to 
humans. Animals thus play an essential role in maintaining zoonotic infections in nature. 
Zoonoses may be bacterial, viral, or parasitic, or may involve unconventional agents. 
As well as being a public health problem, many of the major zoonotic diseases prevent the efficient 
production of food of animal origin and create obstacles to international trade in animal products. 
According to WHO, the Nipah virus infection is a newly emerging zoonosis. Kozhikode and 
Malappuram districts have been declared free of Nipah virus recently by the Kerala government.
